INDIAN ECONOMY - before 1991
why we needed new economic policies?
crises - BOP,foreign exchange reserve deficit.
(3 slides)


reforms-
trade policy
industrial policies
FDI
reforms in various sectors






positive point-
the Post-liberalisation period (since 1991) has changed the lives of indians drastically more than 300million indians climbed into middle class from poverty.

 The
authorities at the Reserve Bank of India slowed the decline in value by expending
international reserves.

***INDIAN ECONOMY - before 1991

By 1985, India had started having balance of payments problems. By the end of 1990, it was in a serious economic crisis. 
The government was close to default, its central bank had refused new credit and foreign exchange reserves had been reduced to such a point 
that India could barely finance three weeks’ worth of imports which led the Indian government to airlift national gold reserves as a pledge to the International
 Monetary Fund (IMF) in exchange for a loan to cover balance of payment debts.
		The crisis was caused by currency devaluation, the current account deficit.SPrecipitated by the Gulf War , India’s oil import bill swelled,

****NEW ECONOMIC POLICY 1991

India opened up the economy in the early nineties following a major crisis that led by a foreign exchange
crunch that dragged the economy close to defaulting on loans. The credibility of country's economy reached
the sinking level and no country was willing to advance or lend to India at any cost. The country ran out of
foreign exchange reserves. To face the crisis situation, the government decided to bring about major economic
reforms to revive Indian economy. These reforms were popularly known as 'structural adjustments' or
'liberalization' or 'globalization'.

****(1) LIBERALIZATION:

 Dr. Manmohan Singh, our former finance minister openED the way of this free and liberalized economy in our country .

Simply speaking liberalisation means to free to economy from the controls imposed by the Govt.

Before 1991, Govt. had put many types of controls on Indian economy.

These were as follows:

(a) Industrial Licensing System:
	Private players could manufacture goods only with official licences.The quantity of goods they were allowed to produce was determined by the licence regime,
        not by free-market demand.

(b) Foreign exchange control

(c) Price control on goods

(d) Import License

Before the process of reforms began in 1991, the government attempted to close the Indian economy to the outside world. The Indian currency, the rupee, was inconvertible 
and high tariffs and import licensing prevented foreign goods reaching the market. India also operated a system of central planning for the economy, in which firms 
required licences to invest and develop. This bureaucracy often led to absurd restrictions: up to 80 agencies had to be satisfied before a firm could be granted a licence
to produce, and, even then, the state would decide what was produced, how much, at what price and what sources of capital were used.
The Indian currency, the rupee, was inconvertible and high tariffs and import licensing prevented foreign goods reaching the market.


Steps taken for Liberalization: The following steps have been taken for liberalization:

(i) Independent determination of interest rate:

ADVERTISEMENTS:

Under the policy of liberalisation interest rate of the banking system will not be determined by RBI rather all Banks are independent to determine the rate of interest.

(ii) Increase in the investment limit of the Small Scale Industries:

Investment limit of the small scale industries has been raised to Rs. 1 crore. So that they can modernize their industry.

(iii) Freedom to import capital goods:

Indian industries will be free to buy machines and raw materials from foreign countries to expand their business.

(iv) Freedom to import Technical know-how:

Under new economic policy the entrepreneurs are free to import technical know-how and develop modernisations. The main aim of the policy is to develop computers and electronies.

(v) Freedom for expansion and production to Industries:

Industries are free to expand and produce under the policy of liberalisation. Previously, the govt. used to fix the maximum limit of production capacity. No industry could produce beyond that limit. Now the industry can produce freely. Also they can produce anything depending on the demand.

(vi) Freedom from Monopolies Act:

According to Monopolies and Restrictive Trade Practices (MRTP) Act, all those companies having assets worth Rs. 100 crore or more were called MRTP firms and were subjected to several restrictions. Now these firms have not to obtain prior approval of the Govt. for taking investment decision.

(vii) Removal of Industrial Licensing and Registration:

Previously private sector had to obtain license from Govt. for starting a new venture. In this policy private sector has been freed from licensing and other restrictions.

Due to all these controls, the economy became defective. The entrepreneurs were unwilling to establish new industries.
Corruption, undue delays and inefficiency rose due to these controls. Rate of economic growth of the economy came down.
Economic reforms were introduced to reduce the restrictions imposed on the economy.

*** Positive and Negative impacts

negative --
(1) Before liberalization, farmers across the country had access to seeds from state government institutions and the seed market was well regulated, with liberalization India’s seed market opens to global agribusiness. This hit farmers and unregulated market, seed prices shot up and fake seeds made appearance in  a big way.

(2)Due to tax reforms, the tax/GDP ratio declined at central level. Central transfers to state governments also declined. State governments were forced to borrow in the market and other (often international) sources at high interest rates.



***PRIVATIZATION
Simply speaking, privatisation means permitting the private sector to set up industries which were previously reserved for the public sector. Under this policy many PSU’s were sold to private sector. In privatisation, the Govt.’s role is only reduced it does not disappear. Literally speaking, privatisation is the process of involving the private sector-in the ownership of Public Sector Units (PSU’s).

***MEASURES ADOPTED
1. Sale of shares:

Indian Govt. has been selling shares of PSU’s to public and financial institution e.g. Govt. sold shares of Maruti Udyog Ltd. This was the private sector will acquire ownership of these PSU’s. The share of private sector has increased from 45% to 55%.

2. Disinvestment in PSU’s:

The Govt. has started the process of disinvestment in those PSU’s which had been running into loss. It means that Govt. has been selling out these industries to private sector. Govt. has sold enterprises worth Rs. 30,000 crores to the private sector.

3. Minimisation of Public Sector:

Previously Public sector was given the importance with a view to help in industralisation and removal of poverty. But these PSU’s could not able to achieve this objective and policy of contraction of PSU’s was followed under new economic reforms. Number of industries reserved for public sector was reduces from 17 to 4.

(a) Transport and railway

(b) Mining of atomic minerals

(c) Atomic energy

(d) Defence equipment

*** Positive and Negative impacts
positive--
(1)Better results in terms of revenues and efficiency and productivity.
   Reduced the burden on govt.
   Better results in revenues and efficiency and productivity
   Increased competition.
   More responsive to customer complaints.
   Removal of political interference.

negative---
   Concentration of wealth in few hands.
   Unhealthy competition.
   More focus on profit maximization and less on social objectives.
   Lack of transparency in private sector.


****GLOBALIZATION**
Broadly speaking, the term 'globalization' means integration of economies and societies through cross country
flows of information, ideas, technologies, goods, services, capital, finance and people. Cross border integration
can have several dimensions - cultural, social, political and economic.

**MEASURES ADOPTED

1.FERA  (1973) was scrapped and FEMA was passed in 1991 to facilitate entry of MNCs.
2.Import liberalization by reducing import duties.
3.Raising capital in foreign countries by the GDR route (Global Deposit Receipt).
4.Encourage NRIs, Foreign Institutional Investors (FIIs) and MNCs to invest in India.
5.Free mobility of managerial personnel and entrepreneurs.


**IMPACTS

positive--

Expansion of market.
International co-operation.
Efficient technological innovations.
Deregulation and lowering of trade and tariff barriers.
Improved economic relations with other countries.

negative--

Low growth of agriculture sector.
Adverse impact on environment.
Free trade limits the ability of states to set policy and protect domestic companies.
Rise in Rural- Urban divide.



***POST SCENERIO

GDP GROWTH
India remained the second fastest growing economy in the world, behind China until 2015. Especially, 
between 2005 and 2008, the economy clocked the 9% mark annually. With the NDA government revising the GDP growth figures and China slowing down, 
India is now being billed as the fastest growing major economy in the world, with a growth rate of 7.6% in 2015-16.

FDI
Before 1991, foreign investment was negligible. The first year of reform saw a total foreign investment of only $74 million. 
However, investments have steadily risen since then, except for occasional blips between 1997 and 2000 and 2008 and 2012 – owing to the global economic slowdown.
As of 31 March 2016, the country has received total FDI of $371 billion, since 1991. The year 2008 recorded the highest FDI inflow of $43.40 billion. 
The biggest spurt in inflow was between 2005 and 2006 – 175.54%. As of March 2016, India has attracted $10.55 billion worth of FDI. 
In 2015, India received $63 billion (nearly Rs 4.19 lakh crore) and replaced China as the top FDI destination, according to The Financial Times.

FOREX
It was India’s dismal state of forex reserves that forced the government to bring in economic reforms. 
Now, 25 years later, forex reserves are at a record high. In 1991, it stood at just $5.8 billion. 
As of 24 June, the country’s forex reserves are at $360.8 billion. Usually, import coverage of 7-8 months is considered sufficient. 
The biggest jump in reserves was witnessed between 2007 and 2008 when the kitty bulged 55% to hit $309.2 billion.

EXTERNAL DEBT
As the economy expanded so did the country’s external debt as companies started borrowing from the overseas markets to fund their growth. 
In 1991, the country’s external debt stood at $83.8 billion. The rise has been steady with the figure in December 2015 hitting $480.2 billion. 
Though the figure looks huge, as a percentage of GDP the external debt has declined. In 1991-92, external debt as a percentage of GDP stood at 38%. 
The corresponding figure in 2015 is just about 24%. Between 2007 and 2008, external debt rose by more than 30% which is the steepest rise in the last 25 years.

FII
Unlike FDI, FII investment is not for long term and is sensitive to domestic and international volatility. 
FII inflows and outflows may often reflect a nation’s economic and political stability. In 1992-93, FII inflow stood at a meagre $4.2 million. 
By 1994-95, the figure had risen to $2.43 billion. However, there was a net outflow of $386 million for the first time in 1998-99. 
The reason for this may be the political instability and the Kargil War. 
Another major outflow was recorded in 2008-09 – $9.83 billion – during the global financial crisis. 
FII inflow rose to $45.69 billion in 2014-15 from $8.87 billion in 2013-14, a 414 percent spike in just one year. 
In 2015-16, however, there was a net FII outflow of $2.53 billion.


PER CAPITA INCOME
Per capita income is the average income of every citizen arrived at by dividing the GDP by the country’s population. 
Though purely a statistical exercise which may not necessarily show the true picture of a country’s development, nevertheless the data makes for an interesting read. 
Between 1991 and 2016, per capita income rose from Rs 6,270 to Rs 93,293. This is a whopping 1388 percent jump. 
However, there’s nothing to be euphoric about the number. As RBI governor Raghuram Rajan says, with this number we are nowhere near ending poverty. 
“...We are still a $1,500 per capita economy. All the way from $1,500 per capita to $50,000, which is where Singapore is, there is a lot of things to do. 
We are still a relatively poor economy and to wipe the tear from every eye, one would at least want to be middle-income around $6,000-7,000 which, 
if reasonably distributed, will have dealt with extreme poverty. And that is two decades worth of work to be even moderately satisfied,” 
he said in a recent interview to The Times of India.

PPP
Purchasing power parity (PPP) gives a comprehensive idea on the standard of living and the cost of living in a particular country. 
When per capita income of Indians is calculated in terms of PPP, the standard of living has improved for sure. 
However, the cost of living has risen too. In 1991, per capita PPP was $1,173. In 2014, it rose nearly five-fold to $5,701. 
Nevertheless, when compared with developed countries, India’s standard of living as well as cost of living is quite low.

EMPLOYMENT
The labour force in India currently stands at 49.7 crores. In 1991, it stood at 33.7 crores. More or less two-fifth of population is part of the labour force. 
The most important fact is that the decline in unemployment rate over the last 25 years is only marginal – from 4.3% in 1991 to 3.6% in 2014. 
The sectoral composition of labour has witnessed a notable change. The agriculture sector, which is considered India’s backbone, 
now employs less than 50% of the labour force, while industrial and service sectors have marginally surged ahead.

